

Grassroots Vol.XLVII, No.I                                                   January-June 2013 
149 
 
CRIME AND POVERTY IN URBAN AREAS OF PAKISTAN:  
CAUSE AND EFFECT RELATIONSHIP 
 
Ghulam Ali Buriro 
Ameer Ali Buriro 
Najma Gopang 
 
ABSTRACT 
Society is a web of social relationship, which undergoes a change 
necessitating their  adjustment. When they fail to adjust  themselves we 
have social disequilibrium giving birth to social problems. In this vein, 
crime is one of the major social problems of urban area in the world 
including Pakistan. This research paper surveys crime scenario in urban 
areas  of  Pakistan  and  findings suggest  that  crime  rates are  higher  in 
poor urban areas than in affluent urban, suburban, or rural areas. This 
paper  verifies  the  cause  and  effect  relationship  between  poverty  and 
crime in the urban locale of Pakistan. 
_________________________ 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
Crime is said to be a violation of rules and laws, for which 
any   governing   body/authority   can   prescribe   and   suggest 
punishment  and  conviction  for  related  violation. Some  of  these 
crimes are socially known and the criminals are punished in one 
way  or  the  other  by  legally  established  agencies  or  socially 
approved methods. However, violence and crime retard expansion 
and  have  always  openly  affected cities  in  terms  of  social  and 
physical infrastructure including roads and public facilities, and the 
individual properties as well. Recent upsurge in crime has become 
major  societal  observable  fact  of  urban  society in  Pakistan. The 
crime  rates  have  increased  steadily  in  recent  years  in  Pakistan. 
Plenty  of  budgetary  resources  of  the  country  are  spent  on 
detection, apprehension and conviction of the criminals, yet crime 
goes  on  increasing  day  by  day.  The  law  and  order  situation  in 
Karachi is especially serious and is regarded as the most dangerous 
city of the Pakistan (www.defence.pk). It is estimated that there are 
more  than  five  million  illegal  immigrants  in  Sindh  including 
Biharis, Bengalis, Burmese, Afghans, Vietnamese, Bosnians, etc. 
in the urban areas (Sahoutara 2012). Moreover, rapidly increasing 

Grassroots Vol.XLVII, No.I                                                   January-June 2013 
150 
 
population has pushed  the  infrastructure  of  urban  society  on  the 
verge of collapse, on the other hand, steady rise in poverty in the 
less developed areas (katchi abadi) of various cities. In this way, 
on  an  average, five  to  ten  people are  killed due  to  political 
violence,  murders,  robberies,  bombings  and  kidnappings (Khan 
2011). 
Although there was a crime in primitive societies, as well, yet 
the traditional customs, rites, rituals and mores were strong enough 
to  control  the  individual  behavior  effectively. The  delinquents, 
offenders and ruffians were severely punished at local level by the 
community in general (Garland 2003:5). In modern societies, the 
influence  of  mores,  folk  ways  and  traditional  customs  has 
considerably  loosened and  it  has  become  difficult  to  compel 
universal  observance  of  mores.  The  modern  societies  have 
population,  which  is  heterogeneous  in  race  and  cultural 
background  and  is  differentiated  in various  classes.  They  have 
several norms of conduct which often clash with one another and 
have limited control over the behavior of their members. Besides, 
the rapid  urbanization associated  with  economic  and  social 
progress has engendered criminal activities. Frequency of several 
crimes  in  major  cities  of  Pakistan  shows  the  negative  outfall  of 
urbanization which is expressly manifested in less developed areas. 
The criminal behavior is due a number of interrelated factors 
involving  environment  and  personality.  Urbanization,  rapid 
economic  liberation,  growing  mass  political  upheaval  and 
inappropriate policy  measures  and inadequate  feedback  of  law 
enforcement bodies have contributed to higher rates of crime and 
encouraging  violence  in  urban  areas.  There  are  many  social  and 
economic  reasons,  including  unemployment, which have played 
their  role  in  worsening  law  and  order  in the  urban  areas  of  the 
country.  The  recent  increase  in  suicide  incidents  is  the  result  of 
unemployment and injustice in the society. The culture of extortion 
life of the common man is miserable in the urban areas. This paper 
explores the causes of crime in different localities of various cities 
in Pakistan.  
 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The  data  about  nature  and  extent  of  crime  is  grossly 
inadequate and unreliable because of under-reporting in surveys by 

Grassroots Vol.XLVII, No.I                                                   January-June 2013 
151 
 
the institutions gathering statistical data regarding the incidence of 
crime and violence. Thus, this research study is explanatory as well 
as  articulated  through  quantitative  and  qualitative  approaches 
based on previous research and data collected by different sources. 
Thus qualitative analysis is done in the light of secondary sources.  
 
CAUSES OF CRIME IN URBAN AREAS 
The crime has no single or simple cause. Each crime has a 
complex history and is usually caused by many factors, which are 
sometimes even difficult to determine. Among the several cause no 
priority can  be  ranked.  Crime  does  not  offer  single  or  simple 
explanation for its occurrence, so crimes should be considered in 
their complex totality and only then can be understood and dealt 
with effectively. The commonly accepted view about crime today 
is  that  there  is  no  single  cause  of  crime,  for  individuals  become 
criminals for different reasons (UCR 2004). Table-1 below gives 
relationship  of  the  different  modes  of  crime  with  perpetrators, 
victims and locations. 
 
Table-1 
Typology of Crime and Its Location Impact 
 
Nature of 
crime 
perpetrators Victims Causes Location and 
Impact 
Petty crime, 
theft 
Wide variety 
of 
individuals, 
probably 
from low 
and middle 
levels 
Same as 
perpetrators
 
Opportunity,
 
necessity 
Localized 
Domestic 
violence 
Men Female 
partners 
Culture, 
frustration, 
tradition 
Household 
Violent 
crime: 
murder, 
assault, 
mugging 
Men 
between age 
15-35 
Same as 
perpetrators
 
Enmity, 
power, 
petty crime 
gone 
undone 
 
Household, 
neighborhood
 

Grassroots Vol.XLVII, No.I                                                   January-June 2013 
152 
 
Armed 
robbery, 
household 
kidnapping 
Men, often 
as part of a 
gang 
Upper and 
middle 
class 
households 
Ransom, 
enmity, 
high 
financial 
returns 
Localized, 
neighborhood
 
Political 
violence 
Organized or 
unorganized 
groups/parties
 
State, other 
groups 
Numerous Local, city-
wide, 
national 
Mob/gang 
neighborhood
 
violence 
Mafia, gangs Other 
gangs, 
groups 
individuals 
Terrain, 
power, 
politics 
Localized 
Crime 
against 
property 
Mafia, state, 
municipality, 
individuals, 
groups 
State/private
 
land and 
property, 
other gang 
/groups 
Need for 
land, 
housing or 
speculation 
Localized, 
neighborhood
 
Drug 
trafficking 
Organized 
groups, 
middlemen, 
police, state 
Individuals 
across 
social 
classes 
Large 
financial 
gains 
Neighborhood,
 
city, state 
international 
Source: Crime  Statistical  Division, Crime  Statistics.  Ministry  of  Economic 
Affairs, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad, 2009. 
 
Social Causes 
In  the  urban  setup,  the  family  system  is  disorganized.  The 
children,  parents  and  grandparents  in  a family  are weakly 
associated.  The  children  and  adult like an  unrestricted  life to 
follow their own individual paths. Due to this the sex crimes are 
increasing. One major cause of adultery, abortion, prostitution and 
juvenile delinquency is the undesirable domestic conditions. Social 
control in modern society has weakened. In urban areas especially 
in big cities people usually have very impersonal relations. In this 
environment  one can  easily  commit crime  and  can  conceal  his 
identity.  The  modern  system  of  education  is  lacking  of  ethical 
education that is why it has failed to develop the character of the 
individuals. So the individuals especially young are easily attracted 
and indulge in crimes. The dowry system, wrong system of mate 
choice,  consumption  of  alcohol,  caste  system,  has  also  been 
responsible  for  increasing  criminal  activity.  In  addition  to  these, 
the media has also contributed to the increase in crime.  

Grassroots Vol.XLVII, No.I                                                   January-June 2013 
153 
 
 
Economic Causes          
Poverty:  Poverty  as  defined  as  the  paucity  of  some  fixed 
level  of  material  goods  necessary  for  survival  and  minimal  well 
being.  A hungry  stomach can  literally  do  anything  in  order  to 
appease his hunger. Actually poverty and inequality are behind the 
crime.  Poverty  is  commonly  considered  as  utter  dispossession 
while  inequality is  regarded  as  relative  dispossession. Besides, 
inequity,  there  are  many    ways  to  measure both  poverty  and 
inequity in terms of unemployment, high rates of divorce, single-
parent  households,  high  population  density,  dilapidated  housing 
and poor schools. 
Unemployment: Many   youngsters   in   cities having 
professional degrees often take to robbery and stealing when they 
are frustrated by continued unemployment. It is due to the need of 
merit  in  the  concerned  institutions,  when  less  privileged  class  is 
not  entertained  in  the  jobs  they  are  disappointed  and  drop  them 
into the inferiority complex which show the ways to the individual 
in the crime. In the end frustrated youngsters fall into the hand of 
criminals and gangsters and eventually they chose their way of life 
by the way. 
Industrialization: Urbanization   is   the   result   of 
industrialization.  In  cities  the  society  fails  to  exercise  social 
control. Some thinkers are of the opinion that geographical causes 
also stimulate crime. Sometimes, people connected with political 
groups also assist criminals and make use of them to inflict injury 
or  to  defame  members  of  the  opposing  groups. In  current  years, 
however, the ‘deep anger’ explanation has become more famous, 
and  many  criminologists  now  relate  economic  inequality  with 
violent  crime.  Perhaps  the most  common  connection  is  with 
conventional or street crime. In cities the society fails to exercise 
social control. 
 
Political Causes 
In addition to these, the political groups also assist criminals 
and create law and order situation in the countries especially in big 
cities like Karachi, Hyderabad, Lahore, Multan, Peshawar, Quetta. 
The political setup also encourages the crimes for their own vested 
interests and political array for achieving power and status in the 

Grassroots Vol.XLVII, No.I                                                   January-June 2013 
154 
 
society to govern on the suppressed and depressed class with their 
power and authority. In our modern times government machineries 
are slow and inefficient with the result that this becomes premium 
on the illegal activities of the criminals. Also, the legal system in 
Pakistan  is complex  and  complicated  and  the  criminals  are 
confident that they can escape free (ICG 2010). They know that by 
their illegally earned wealth they  can purchase as  well  as mould 
the course of law. Besides, the politicians encourage the criminals 
for the one reason or the other.  
 
SUGGESTION/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Since there is no single cause of crimes a single measure for 
remedy  cannot  be  suggested.  However, improvements  in  the 
following areas can decrease the crime ratio in urban localities:   
 Education develops respect for law among people and promote 
sense  of  understanding  the  environment  in  a  better  way an 
educated person prove to be a better citizen than an illiterate 
and ignorant person. Thus, education of masses will decrease 
the nature and rate of crimes in the country.   
 Every effort should be made to improve the living standard of 
the  people,  as  the  improvement  in the  living  standard  brings 
better  housing  and  sanitary  facilities  will  ultimately  lead  to 
healthy socialization of an individual.  
 Social security and insurance facilities against unemployment, 
old  age  or  other  mishaps  may  decrease  the  crime  rate  in 
society. It may be mentioned here that as the criminal behavior 
is the product of social disorganization, total prevention of the 
crimes  is  next  to  impossible.  The  only  remedy  is  to  adopt 
preventive measures on the one hand and treat the criminals by 
providing them better  chances  for  their  readjustment  so  that 
they can become the normal and useful members of society. 
 True following of religious precepts can solve the problem in 
the long run. Only a completely modernized peaceful society 
can  solve  the  problem  of crime, because  it advocates 
reformatory rather than preventive treatment of criminals.  
 The  criminals  in jails  may  be  provided  with adequate food, 
clothing and recreational facilities.  

Grassroots Vol.XLVII, No.I                                                   January-June 2013 
155 
 
 The poverty and unemployment should be reduced by creating 
job opportunities, opening new industries, providing vocational 
training and introducing various social and economic reforms 
in the country.  
 The  character  building  of  individuals  can  be  done  through 
introducing  reforms  in  education  system.  In  addition  to  this 
there is  dire  need  for  a  public  safety  commission  and  civil 
society role to aware people at societal level.  
 
CONCLUSION  
As discussed in this article, the crime rate in this age and in 
this setup is alarming. As currently terrorist groups also share in 
the crime, consequently death rate of common man has increased 
which  is  also  other  considerable  and  debatable  issue.  In  this 
situation  appropriate  strategic  plan  and  policy is  needed  to  curb 
this on grassroots level as society could work and run smoothly. 
After  reviewing  all  these factors  it  is  observed  that crime  and 
criminals are the nuisance for society and they always impair the 
society drastically.  Paradoxically,  State  in  Pakistan  appears  least 
interested. And if it will not be on the priority of the government to 
curb the crime in the urban and bordering areas of Pakistan, the 
Pakistani society will face more dilemmas and dangers threatening 
civilized  living  standards.  Crime  and  criminals  will  increase  and 
would become nuisance in every section of society in every sector 
(social, legal, societal and cultural) unless not treated firmly by the 
law enforcement agencies.  
 
REFERENCES 
Garland, David. (2003). The Culture of Control: Crime and Social Order 
in Contemporary Society. New York: Oxford University Press.  
UCR .(2004). Uniform Crime Reporting Handbook. Clarksburg: Uniform 
Crime Reporting Program, Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
ICG. (2010). Reforming Pakistan’s Criminal Justice System. Asia Report 
No.196 – 6 December 2010, Islamabad. 
Statistical Division. (2008-2009). Crime Statistics. Islamabad: Ministry 
of Economic Affairs and Statistics, Government of Pakistan. 
Chirac’s,  T.  (1987).  ‘Rates  of  Crime  and  Unemployment’, Social 
Problems, 34:187- 211. 
http://www.defence.pk/forums/social-issues-current-events/212102-
karachi-amongst-most-dangerous-cities-cnbc.html 

Grassroots Vol.XLVII, No.I                                                   January-June 2013 
156 
 
Khan,  Zia  (2010,  July  5). "Govt  may  tighten  anti-terror  laws". The 
Express Tribune, Network. Retrieved 25 January 2011. 
Sahoutara,  Naeem.  (2012,  October  26).  ‘Karachi violence: SC links 
unrest to illegal immigrants’, The Express Tribune. Retrieved from 
http://tribune.com.pk/story/457095/karachi-violence-sc-links-
unrest-to-illegal-immigrants/  
_____ 
 
 
 
 
 
  